---
title: "'A heightened issue:' Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis signs big gun bill into law"
layout: post
categories:
- information
tags:
- Anthony Talcott
---

- HB 6025 took effect upon being signed

TALLAHASSEE, Fla. --- On Wednesday, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis signed three bills into law --- one of which makes a big change to state emergency statutes.

[...]

[...] the third (HB 6025) repeals a provision of state law that automatically imposed firearm-related restrictions during a local state of emergency.

Previously, state law required that during an emergency arising from a threat of violence or public disorder, the following would be prohibited:

- The sale (or display for sale) of firearms or ammunition

- The intentional possession of a firearm in a public place (other than law enforcement or military)

HB 6025 took effect upon being signed. As a result, these prohibitions no longer apply during such an emergency.

The bill's sponsor --- Rep. Monique Miller (R-Palm Bay) --- provided the following statement for why she initially filed the bill back in February.

> When Floridians most need the ability to defend themselves, their families and their property, Florida statute strictly prohibits it. This bill would repeal section 870.044 of the Florida Statutes, which currently establishes automatic limits on the possession and carrying of firearms and ammunition when an emergency is declared. By removing these automatic restrictions, the bill ensures that lawful gun owners are not preemptively barred from exercising their Second Amendment rights during times of crisis.
>
> This legislation is significant because it addresses concerns about balancing public safety with constitutional liberties. During emergencies --- when personal security may become a heightened issue --- law-abiding citizens may need to rely on their right to bear arms more than ever. While public safety remains essential, HB 6025 clarifies that citizens who follow existing firearms laws should not face automatic prohibitions simply because of an emergency declaration.
>
> <cite>Rep. Monique Miller, "Why I Filed This Bill"</cite>

State law allows local officials like sheriffs, chiefs of police, and mayors to declare a local state of emergency in certain situations. This can involve riots or other incidents where many people are breaking the law at once, posing a risk to other people and property.

After it was filed, HB 6025 garnered widespread support among state lawmakers, passing both houses by a large margin before heading to DeSantis' desk.

[...]

Source: Anthony Talcott, clickorlando.com/news/florida/2025/05/29/a-heightened-issue-florida-gov-ron-desantis-signs-big-gun-bill-into-law/
